The secrets of the palm wine tree are best kept in an empty gourd.


A dog that has two homes will go hungry

A billy goat will find its way home on the day it limps:a person will know his way to the house when he has a problem.

The mouth of the elderly smells but its not rotten:one need listen to the
adult for what they say might not make sense but will make sense in the future.

The one who has ever been bitten by a snake is always scared whenever he sees an earth worm: one will always be scared and more careful  when he seem to
be going through a similar problem.

Do not put on a cap on your kneecap when there is the head: one should not lie when there is the truth to be told.

When there is the mouth dont use your head to talk:go straight to the point and going round in circle.


A person who sells eggs should not start a fight in the market.

No matter how far an eagle flies up the sky ,it will definitely come down to look for food


The little opportunity given to a monkey to wear cloths does not guarantee it to join the dinning table.


No matter how hot your anger may be, it cannot cook yam

However much the buttocks are in a hurry, they will always remain behind

Before you go out with a widow, you must first ask her what killed the husband.

A child can play with its mother's breasts, but not its father's testicles'

There's no virgin in a maternity ward...

If a man wants to grow a long tooth, he should have the lip to cover it.

An agama lizard in the village will always remain an agama in town

When the mouse laughs at the cat, there is a hole nearby"

It requires a lot of carefulness to kill the fly that perches on the scrotum’

A goat’s frown cannot stop it from being taken to the market.

No matter how far you urinate, the last drop always falls at your feet’’

The gentle strides of a tiger does not indicate cowardice.

The monkey who tries to see the hunter clearly collects bullets in its eyes.

the sparrow said that since the hunter has learnt how to shoot without missing, it has equally learnt to fly without perching. 

Snails don't venture where horned animals gather.

The lizard who threw confusion into his mother's funeral rite, did he expect outsiders to carry the burden of honouring his dead

If the sun claims superiority over the moon, let it shine at night.

A man does not test the depth of a river with both legs.
 
The okro plant never grows taller than the owner. 

All lizards lie prostrate: how can a man tell which lizard suffers from bellyache?

A child does not laugh at the ugliness of his mother. ~ghanaian proverb

A straight tree never lasts in the forest. ~ghanaian proverb


A cracked bell can never sound well. ~ghanaian proverb

A healthy person who begs for food is an insult to a generous farmer. ~ghanaian proverb

Fire and gunpowder do not sleep together. ~ghanaian proverb

Hunger is felt by a slave and hunger is felt by a king. ~ghanaian proverb

If the strong man has nothing else, he can at least command others. ~ghanaian proverb

The length of a frog can only be determined after it dies. ~ghanaian proverb

Do not follow the path. Go where there is no path to begin a trail. ~ghanaian proverb

If a blind man says he will throw a stone at you, he probably has his foot on one. ~ghanaian proverb

The man who has a stone usually has no nut to crack, And the man who has a nut has no stone to crack it with. ~ghanaian proverb.

Is it not ignorance that makes the rat attack the cat?

The hyena flirts with the hen, the hen is happy, not knowing that her death has come.

The lion's liver is vain wish for dogs

Secrets of the owl must not be known in daylight


Can the cockroach be innocent in a gathering of fowls?

The mangrove tree dwells in the river, but does that make it a crocodile?

A chicken eats corn, drinks water, swallows pebbles, yet she complains of having no teeth. If she had teeth, would she eat gold? Let her ask the cow who has teeth yet eats grass.

It is the calm and silent water that drowns a man. ~ghanaian proverb

No one tests the depth of the river with both feet. ~ghanaian proverb

A man sitting in his own house, learns nothing. You must get out of your house to learn. ~ghanaian proverb

It is a child who has never traveled who says that only his mother prepares tasty meals. ~ghanaian proverb

A knife knows no master. ~ghanaian proverb

A slave does not choose his master. ~ghanaian proverb

A woman is like a blanket: if you cover yourself with it, it bothers you; if you throw it aside you will feel the cold. Ghanaian proverb

by going and coming, a bird weaves its nest. ~ghanaian proverb

He who is guilty has much to say. ~ghanaian proverb

If the hunter comes home with mushrooms, don’t ask him how his hunt was. ~ghanaian proverb

Marriage is like a groundnut: you have to crack them to see what is inside. ~ghanaian proverb

The chicken also knows when it’s morning, but still watches the mouth of the cock. ~ghanaian proverb

No one prepares for the harmattan by drinking a barrel of water. 

When a ripe fruit sees an honest man, it drops. ~nigerian proverb

A man who has one finger pointing at another has three pointing towards himself. ~nigerian proverb

A fowl does not forget where it lays it eggs. ~nigerian proverb

It is by the strength of their number that the ants in the field are able to carry their prey to the nest. ~nigerian proverb

By being grateful, a man makes himself deserving of yet another kindness. ~nigerian proverb

A speedy wrestling match and a bad fall go hand in hand. ~nigerian proverb

One finger cannot remove lice from the head. ~nigerian proverb

Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense. ~nigerian proverb

A hunter who has only one arrow does not shoot with careless aim. ~nigerian proverb

Without retaliation evils would one day become extinct from the world. ~nigerian proverb

One cannot go back to the farmer from whom one borrowed seed-yams to plant to say that the beetles have eaten up the seed-yams. ~nigerian proverb

The one-eyed man does not thank god until he sees a blind man. ~nigerian proverb

Two footsteps do not make a path. ~nigerian proverb

Familiarity breeds contempt; distance breeds respect. ~nigerian proverb

However far the stream flows, it never forgets its source. ~nigerian proverb

If all seeds that fall were to grow, then no one could follow the path under the trees. ~nigerian proverb

What an old man will see while seating, a small child cannot see it even standing on top of mountain! ~nigerian proverb

As long as you stay in a group, the lion will stay hungry. ~nigerian proverb

When the bush is on fire, the antelope ceases to fear the hunter’s bullet. ~nigerian proverb

Two raindrops do not make a pool. ~nigerian proverb

The child that will not allow his parents to sleep through the night must be prepared to stay awake himself. ~nigerian proverb

A bird that flies from the ground onto an anthill does not know that it is still on the ground. ~nigerian proverb

A tree is best measured when it’s down. ~nigerian proverb

The death that will kill a man begins as an appetite. ~nigerian proverb

The unruly fowl becomes respectful in a pot of soup. ~nigerian proverb

Even the snail arrives at its destination. ~nigerian proverb

When the laborer is praised, his cutlass begins to cut more keenly. ~nigerian proverb

It is the fear of what tomorrow may bring that makes the tortoise to carry his house along with him wherever he goes. ~nigerian proverb

he who does not look ahead always remains behind. ~nigerian proverb

Wisdom is like a goat skin bag; every man carries his own”.

A boy sent by his father to steal does not go stealthily but breaks the door with his feet.”

When a mad man walks naked, it is his kinsmen who feel shame, not himself.”

Only a foolish man Will hunt a leopard with his bare hand”

“in dealing with a man who thinks you are a fool, it is good sometimes to remind him that you know what he knows but have chosen to appear foolish for the sake of peace”

When we hear a building has collapsed do we ask if the ceiling fell with along it?”

When the moon is shinning, the cripple becomes hungry for a walk”.

An old woman is always uneasy when dry bone are mentioned in a proverb”.

Eneke the bird says that since men have learnt to shoot without missing he has learnt to fly without perching”.

If one finger brings oil, it soil all the others”.

When a man blasphemes what do we do? Do we go and stop his mouth? No. We put our fingers into our ears to stop us hearing”.

When a hand shake goes below the elbow, then know that it has turned into something else”.

He who will hold another down in the mud must stay in the mud to keep him down.

A man who brings home ant-infested faggots should not complain if he is visited by lizards

The man who carries a deity is not a king."

If a man kills the sacred python in the secrecy of his hut, the matter lies between him and his god

Knowledge is like a baobab tree; no one can encompass it with their hands.

a. From the akans

1. Rain beats the leopard’s skin but it does not wash out the spots.

2. Wood already touched by fire is not hard to set alight.

4. Only when you have crossed the river can you say the crocodile has a lump on his snout.

25. When the fool is told a proverb, its meaning has to be explained to him.

Only a fool drinks in the presence of his father 

29. Money is sharper than a sword.

30. It is the fool’s sheep that break loose twice.

The elephant and the tiger do not go hunting on the same pasture.
He who pursues an innocent chicken always stumbles.

a speedy wrestling and a bad fall go hand in hand.
Patient people are patient to gain longevity.
However long the moon disappears, someday it must shine again.
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest.
The thirsty fig sits waiting patiently, waiting for the arrival of the rains.
One does not become a master diviner in a day. A forest is not made in a season. The swoop of an eagle has seen many seasons and floods…
it is not only the hare, the tortoise arrives also at the destination.
Back to categories

kindness

without knowing a person we must not hate him.
He who digs a pit for others must invariably fall into it.
Those who derive fun watching lunatics, out to have one as a child or relation to know the pains of it.
A person on whose head lice are being removed, must be grateful.
By being grateful, a man makes himself deserving of yet another kindness.
When the laborer is praised, his cutlass begins to cut more keenly.
If men were now to turn their hostility towards the cat, it would not be long before the domestic cat becomes a wild animal.
If the owner of a calabash calls it a worthless calabash, others will join him to use it to pack rubbish.
Criticism is easy but it does not create.
If one imitates the upright, one becomes upright; if one imitates the crooked, one becomes crooked.
When a sickle is drawn, it in turn draws the tree to which it is hooked.
If a person who curses another is not better than the person he curses, a request is never made of him to rescind the curse.
Back to categories

honesty

money does not announce how it is earned but whereas properly earned money appreciates, improperly earned money depreciates.
The bottom of wealth is sometimes a dirty thing to behold.
Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense.
Back to categories

thoughtfulness

a fowl does not forget where it lays it eggs.
The habit of thinking is the habit of gaining strength.
It is one word of advice that one needs to give to a wise man, and that word keeps multiplying in his mind.
Does a man not know when he has pepper in his eyes? If we forget yesterday, how shall we remember tomorrow.
Thoughts and dreams are the foundation of our being.
We are what our thinking makes us.
Back to categories


those who are carrying elephants home on their heads, need not use their toes to dig up crickets on the way.
One can only try to get what one can from the head of an elephant, no one ever carries it home.
The alcohol that is insufficient for a whole town ought not to intoxicate one man.
The leech that does not let go even when it is filled, dies on the dry land.
A bag that says it will not take more, and a traditional doctor who says he would not leave anything behind are both sure to suffer.
A clay pot of water is never hot-tempered.
Two men quarreling do not share the same seat on a canoe.
A man with no enemies is wealthy man.
it is the toothless animal that arrives first at the base of the fruit tree, to eat his fill before others arrive.
A child does not die because the mother’s breasts are dry.

B. From the ewes

1. What the cat sees and turns its eyes away from, the dog sees and barks at.

2. If there were no elephant in the jungle, the buffalo would be a great animal.

3. Even though the eye is blind, it still contains sleep.

4. The stomach has no holiday.

5. The monkey says that yawning is contagious.

6. A child who knows how to wash his hands dines with the elders.

7. In the presence of the head, the knee does not wear a hat.
[interpretation: if you invest all your resources in one venture, you stand the risk of losing all and suffering the painful consequences. Before you do anything at all, make sure that you have a back-up for it. In other words, it is dangerous for you to plunge yourself into a situation without any careful effort to determine its outcome in advance.]

8. The antelope says that if you stay at one spot in the forest for far too long, you will become thirsty.

9. He who tests the depth of a stream with both feet must be prepared to swim.

10. The parrot that knows how precious its feathers are does not build its nest by the roadside.

11. A lizard that knows how to hide grows to become a crocodile.
[interpretation: if you know how to handle issues properly, you will always make progress.]

12. If you store saliva in your mouth for too long, it turns into water.

13. A crab does not beget a bird.

14. Monkeys play by sizes.

15. A child must learn to cut only the morsel that is fit for his mouth.

16. When a bachelor goes to sleep, he does not hide his entire body in the mosquito net.

17. It is not everybody who is awake when the rain falls at night.

18. The child who has not traveled anywhere before believes that his mother is the best cook.

19. If you find no fish, you have to eat bread.

20. The wasp says that several regular trips to a mud pit enables it to build a house.

21. The wealth of the greedy ultimately goes to the community.

22. Loving someone who does not love you is like loving the rain that falls in the forest.

23. Only someone else can scratch your back for you.

24. The bitter heart eats its owner.

25. A man who pays respect to the great paves the way for his own greatness.

26. A proud heart can survive a general failure because such a failure does not prick its pride.

27. Do not look where you fell, but where you slipped.

28. If you look at a king’s mouth, you will never think that he ever sucked his mother’s breast.

29. Looking somewhere is better than not to look anywhere at all.

30. If you do not spare a day to fix a door to your room, you will waste three years searching for your money (in the room) but you will never find it.

31. If you want to speak to god, tell it to the wind.

32. In a community of beggars, stealing and not begging, is considered a crime.

33. Much roaming about deprived the male rat of its fat.

34. The cockerel drinking water raises its head to god in thankfulness.

35. A woman is a flower in a garden; her husband is the fence around it.
36. An african should not be made to suffer the loss of an arm from a gunshot in europe.

37. Though the lion and the antelope happen to live in the same forest, the antelope still has time to grow up.

38. A stranger does not skin a sheep that is paid as a fine at a chief’s court.

39. The orphan does not rejoice after a heavy breakfast.

40. The poor man’s main tool is his tongue with which he defends himself.

41. “though i am not edible,” says the vulture, “yet i nurse my eggs in the branches of a high tree because man is hard to be trusted.”

42. Yam is sweet, but one should eat it in the normal way, lest swallowing chokes him.

A man who is trampled to death by an elephant is a man who is blind and deaf.
A hunter who has only one arrow does not shoot with careless aim.
A mouse that removes the palm-nut that turns out to be the bait of a trap, would already have known that the palm-nut does not ripen on the ground.
When a palm-branch reaches its height, it gives way for a fresh one to grow.
A bottle of oil warmed over the fire has no means of producing oil by itself.
One cannot go back to the farmer from whom one borrowed seed-yams to plant to say that the beetles have eaten up the seed-yams.
If one were to remove every smoking wood from a fire and condemn it as bad, one would be killing the fire itself.
It is wisdom to prevent someone from whom one cannot accept repayment to have access to one’s valuable possessions.
It is the brutally outspoken man that earns enmity.
The elephant and the tiger do not go hunting on the same pasture.
A farmer does not boast that he has had a good harvest until his stock of yams lasts till the following harvest season.
He who pursues an innocent chicken always stumbles.
The fish that can see that its water is getting shallower, cannot be stranded.
Without knowing a way thoroughly at day time, never attempt to pass it at night.
It is only the tortoise that moves and carries its shell about, which it calls its house.
It is not enough to run, one must arrive and know when one has arrived.
It is a lazy man who says “it is only because i have no time that my farm is overgrown with weeds”.
A man who lives on the bank of a river does not use spittle to wash his hands.
We do not use our bare feet to search for hidden thorns which we have seen in day time.
The gods only hear one wish at a time, and nothing more.
When will the goat be strong enough to kill a leopard.
Every river knows where its water would not be soaked up into the earth, and that is where it flows past.
Back to categories

hard work

a farmer does not conclude by the mere look of it that a corn is unripe; he tears it open for examination.
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest.
To do one’s duty is to eat the prized fruit of honor.
A farmer who would not work inside the rain and would not work under the sun, would have nothing to harvest at the end of the farming year.
The heap of yams you will reap depends upon the number of mounds you have plowed.
It is the work of one’s hands that decides what one eats for dinner – for some it is pounded yam, for others it is pounded plantain or nothing.
An ant-hill that is destined to become a giant ant-hill will definitely become one, no matter how many times it is destroyed by elephants.
He who is afraid of doing too much always does too little.
Sleep and indolence are not cousins of a good harvest.
Success is 10% ability, and 90% sweat.
We live by hope, but a reed never becomes an iroko tree by dreaming.
Sinews and big muscles do not make a farmer.
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind.
Back to categories

not giving up

one must row in whichever boat one finds one’s self.
When a person regrets endlessly, he gets to pay more for what he regrets.
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest.
It is not only the fox, even the snail arrives at its destination.
However long the moon disappears, someday it must shine again.
It is the same moon that wanes today that will be the full moon tomorrow.
It is only the toad that gets up from its knees and falls back again on its knees.
The spider that knows what it will gain sits waiting patiently in its web. The praying mantis is never tired waiting all day.
One does not become a master diviner in a day. A forest is not made in a season. The swoop of an eagle has seen many seasons and floods…
who says the oasis in the desert is happy because of its hidden spring of water?
The cricket is never blinded by the sand of its burrowing.
An oil lamp feels proud to give light even though it wears itself away.
A bird does not change its feathers because the weather is bad.
Back to categories

cooperation

common proverbs of cooperation are:
a herbalist that refuses to ask laymen what leaves he looks for in the bush, must have difficulties getting what he wants.
It is a pot of water that is already half full that the world would like to help in filling to the brim.
If a drum is not made, it is the fault of the master; but if the drum is made and is not beaten, then that is the fault of the boys.
When an elephant falls, meat is sure to be surplus for those who follow the hunter.
One finger cannot remove lice from the head.
When the teeth fall off, the nose is sure to collapse.
A man can not sit down alone to plan for prosperity.
A man who lives alone is either always overworked, or always overfed.
A single tree can not make a forest.
A single man can not build a house.
If a child shoots and arrow that reaches the top of a tall palm tree, then it must be that an elderly person carved the arrow for him.
A man who walks alone carries a load of palm-fronds.
When the right hand washes the left hand and the left hand washes the right hand, both hands become clean.
A housewife who complains that there is not enough foodstuff in the market should remember that if her husband adds to what is already available, there would be more for everyone.
It is by the strength of their number that the ants in the field are able to carry their prey to the nest.
Two footsteps do not make a path.
Two raindrops do not make a pool.
Back to categories

patience

a speedy wrestling and a bad fall go hand in hand.
Patient people are patient to gain longevity.
However long the moon disappears, someday it must shine again.
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest.
The thirsty fig sits waiting patiently, waiting for the arrival of the rains.
One does not become a master diviner in a day. A forest is not made in a season. The swoop of an eagle has seen many seasons and floods…
it is not only the hare, the tortoise arrives also at the destination.
Back to categories

kindness

without knowing a person we must not hate him.
He who digs a pit for others must invariably fall into it.
Those who derive fun watching lunatics, out to have one as a child or relation to know the pains of it.
A person on whose head lice are being removed, must be grateful.
By being grateful, a man makes himself deserving of yet another kindness.
When the laborer is praised, his cutlass begins to cut more keenly.
If men were now to turn their hostility towards the cat, it would not be long before the domestic cat becomes a wild animal.
If the owner of a calabash calls it a worthless calabash, others will join him to use it to pack rubbish.
Criticism is easy but it does not create.
If one imitates the upright, one becomes upright; if one imitates the crooked, one becomes crooked.
When a sickle is drawn, it in turn draws the tree to which it is hooked.
If a person who curses another is not better than the person he curses, a request is never made of him to rescind the curse.
Back to categories

honesty

money does not announce how it is earned but whereas properly earned money appreciates, improperly earned money depreciates.
The bottom of wealth is sometimes a dirty thing to behold.
Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense.
Back to categories

thoughtfulness

a fowl does not forget where it lays it eggs.
The habit of thinking is the habit of gaining strength.
It is one word of advice that one needs to give to a wise man, and that word keeps multiplying in his mind.
Does a man not know when he has pepper in his eyes? If we forget yesterday, how shall we remember tomorrow.
Thoughts and dreams are the foundation of our being.
We are what our thinking makes us.
Back to categories

generosity/sharing

it is an unthinking man who achieves prosperity, and then finds with time, that his body can no longer pass through the door.
When an only kolanut is presented with love, it carries with it more value than might otherwise be associated with a whole pod of several kolanuts.
The man who remembers others, remembers also his creator.
The bird that remembers its flockmates, never missed the way.
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind.
The head could not have got to where it is now if it did not give.
Back to categories

humility

a performing masquerade who tries too hard to outclass his colleagues may expose his anus.
It is from a small seed that the giant iroko tree has its beginning.
A family name is not cooked and eaten, one’s life is the thing.
A good name is better than gold.
He who is courteous is not a fool.
The fowl perspires, but the feathers do not allow us to see the perspiration.
Back to categories

greed

those who are carrying elephants home on their heads, need not use their toes to dig up crickets on the way.
One can only try to get what one can from the head of an elephant, no one ever carries it home.
The alcohol that is insufficient for a whole town ought not to intoxicate one man.
The leech that does not let go even when it is filled, dies on the dry land.
A bag that says it will not take more, and a traditional doctor who says he would not leave anything behind are both sure to suffer.
Back to categories

good behavior

if a man is not clean and smooth, there is nothing he can really do about pride.
Even an old woman may run when a goat carries her snuff-box.
A man who is advised and he takes it, is still a man who acts from his own free will.
When a ripe fruit sees an honest man, it drops.
It is one person in a street that kills a dog and the street is named a street of dog killers.
When a fowl gets to a new town, it stands on one leg until it knows that it is a town where people stand on their two legs.
When a face is sullen it remains there to be seen on its owner.
When a woman cannot have good palm-nuts to give her rich oil, she still has to maintain decency in order to remain one of those that sell good quality oil.
A man who has one finger pointing at another has three pointing towards himself.
A man who eases himself in public, gives cause to others to despise him.
The man who is honored, has first honored himself.
Greatness and beauty do not belong to the gods alone.
Anyone who urinates in a stream should be warned because any of his relatives may drink from the water.
A person who does not bathe, must know it of himself that he is dirty.
Antagonism is not good for fowls, and it is not good for goats; worse still, it is not good for human beings.
Our examples are like seeds on a windy day, they spread far and wide.
A clay pot of water is never hot-tempered.
A person who picks something and decides to make it his own, ought to think how he would feel if he was the person who lost the property he picked.
He who is called a man must behave like a man.
If one would not eat pounded yam for its own sake, one can still eat it for the sake of the soup that goes with it.
One must have to wait till the evening of one’s life time to know what gratitude to pay to one’s guardian spirit.
Back to categories

consequences

a man who is advised and he takes it, is still a man who acts from his own free will.
If hunger forces a farmer in a particular year to eat both his yam tubers and the seed-yams, the succeeding years would still be worse because he would have no yams to eat and none to plant.
Sometimes the rain might force a man more than once to seek shelter under the same tree.
When the roots of a tree begin to decay, it spreads death to the branches.
It is the fear of what tomorrow may bring that makes the tortoise to carry his house along with him wherever he goes.
He who digs a pit for others must invariably fall into it.
Back to categories

peace

let’s fight, let’s fight, no one knows whom fighting would favor.
Two men quarreling do not share the same seat on a canoe.
To have no enemies is equivalent to wealth.
If the owner of two adjacent farms cannot be friends, then they must wait till their next reincarnation to be able to make friends.
Whoever says “let’s fight” does not know who will be victorious.
When a man finds that he was wrong to have refused to eat, he should leave his anger and play a harp to call for harmony.
Without retaliation evils would one day become extinct from the world.
A spacious ground is the right place to demonstrate one’s skill in wrestling.
Back to categories

wisdom and age

an old banana leaf was once young and green.
Old age does not come in just one day.
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind.
Back to categories

courage

he who does not look ahead always remains behind.
Courage is the father of success.
Charms do not perform miracles on the shelf; they perform for those who are brave.
Back to categories

family

a family name is not cooked and eaten, one’s life is the thing.
A person who has children does not die.
We can not choose who our relatives should be, even though we may come to like some better than others.
A woman who is not successful in her own marriage has no advice to give to her younger generations.
When a man loses his prestige, he does not regain it by going to where he is not known.
A good name is better than gold.
A man that begets a barren cannot have a grand child.
A piece of iron can only become what the blacksmith says it should become.
A child who fears beating, would never admit that he played with a missing knife.
A child’s face is his mirror.
It is the habit that a child forms at home, that follows them to their marriage.
It is an irresponsible adult that creates enmity because of a disagreement that arises between two children.
A child is what you put into him.
“flog my erring child” comes from the lips, “don’t hurt him/her” comes from the bottom of the heart.
Talks that are considered to be important must be made to drag on for so long as to make even the deaf begin to hear it.
Criticism is easy but it does not create.
Love is better than a whip.
A child who has no mother will not have scars to show on his back.
Even as the archer loves the arrow that flies, so too he loves the bow that remains constant in his hands.
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind.
Back to categories

friends

to eat from the same pot with another man, is to take an oath of perpetual friendship with him.
If one imitates the upright, one becomes upright; if one imitates the crooked, one becomes crooked.
Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense.
Back to categories

survival

it is the toothless animal that arrives first at the base of the fruit tree, to eat his fill before others arrive.
A child does not die because the mother’s breasts are dry.
If the load is too heavy for someone to carry, one would be better off to give the load to the ground to carry.
The tree that cannot shed its old leaves in the dry season, cannot survive the period of drought.
Back to categories

patriotism

when one is taking a chicken from its roost, the hen is bound to attack with at least its claws.
Even when fire has done its very worst, one still has to resort to it.
When a soup is unpalatable, and the paste of the pounded yam that goes with it is not smooth, that is the time to know a man who loves to eat pounded yam.
A pad that breaks a pot of water does not remain on the head.
A bush fowls’ playground is never appreciably spacious.
If the owner of a calabash calls it a worthless calabash, others will join him to use it to pack rubbish.
It is the boast of every juju priest that unless he dies, no thief can ever come to steal his juju away.
What affects the nose must also affect the eyes that must weep for it.
If a greedy eater is near a patient, such a patient can never survive.
There is no elephant that complains about the weight of its trunk. No elephant is burdened by the weight of its tusks.
When the elderly ones in a house travel, the younger ones quickly grow in experience.
It is when there is a stampede, that a person with big buttocks knows that he carries a load.
If a soup is sweet, it is money that cooks it.
If a child is not well-behaved, she is not sent by the mother to go alone to the market to buy things for her.
A glorious past is the work of a glorious man.
Back to categories

misc

the goat that cries the loudest is not the one that will eat the most.
It is the self-love of the king parrot that made him become a talkative.
The owl is the wisest of all birds because the more it sees, the less it talks.
If gold rusts, what will iron do?
A masquerade does not perform to an outside audience until he performs well at the home base.
How can man be remembered when the giant trees in the forest are soon forgotten.
Dead though the oil-palm may be, the maggot in it lives on.
When a fire starts from the shrine, no precaution can be possible.
Beetles that roll balls out of human faeces demand to be hidden away from the rich man, because there is nothing he wouldn’t buy.
Our elders quote the cock as saying that “it would not be good if one becomes the only person in the world, and that is why they crow every morning to show their number”.
A strong man is remembered on the day of the fight, and a gluttony on the day pounded yam is surplus.
Beauty is not sold and eaten.
A masquerade is not a spirit only because of its mask.
When a woman prepares a dish which others find unpalatable, she says that she prepared it to suit her own taste.
At a time a cockerel matures, it begins to crow to tell the world the time of day.
They are the gods themselves that white-wash the fruits of the pumpkins.
However much the world degenerates, man shall never find worms in salt.
A diviner cannot accurately divine his own future.
A lizard that fell from the top of a tree wastes its time looking back to where it fell from; if there was anything good the lizard deserved, it could not have missed it while it was there on top of the tree.
It is what the eyes of one man sees that is described as a boa constrictor.
Once a cock begins to crow, it never again becomes dumb.
He whose throat is longer than his arm must pray constantly for gods’ protection.
It is he who has no place to call at that moves fast through life.
No frog is tied by a rope to a pond.
The fly that has no one to advise it follows the corpse into the grave.
Everybody joins to blame or condemn a child who overthrows the pot of soup.
Money has the capability of making people laugh; but when they laugh, the foolish ones sometimes forget to close their mouths.
No one feels the pains that arise from unintended injury.
The glow-works light the nights, but more so the night that their mother prepares porridge.
When it is the turn of a man to become the head of a village, he does not need to diviner to tell him that he is destined to rule.
It is for saying that he has no time that the monkey’s body became over-grown with long hairs.
Our elders say that at sunset, it is one’s cloth that one goes to remove from the village square.
The spirit that keeps one going when one has no choice of what else to do must not be mistaken for valor.
It is the fortunate person that the physician undertakes to help.
The gods may still send a gentle breeze when they want to bless us.
Any wealth that takes only a market week to acquire is sure to contain in it things for which the gods will surely come to make claims.

A man with a clear conscience has bad memory.

U can only stop a bird from making a nest on your head but u can't stop it from flying over your head 

Wise people use their tounges to count their teeth 

A fool at 40 is a fool for ever

It is in the house of a coward that people gather and point to the tomb of brave man

It is better to eat mushroom in freedom than to eat meat in slavery

If you choose to lie down with dogs then you must be prepared to wake u with fleas

It is a foolish fly that is buried with a corpse

It is in the eyes of a lazy man that maize ripens

If a snake fails to show its venom, little children will use it in tying firewood

a sheep that will grow horns should ask the ram how its neck feels.]

He who the gods want to destroy, they first make mad.

The rat cannot call the cat to an account

You cannot shave a man's hair in his absence 
He who pays the piper (or drummer) dictates the tune.
