1. DOG HOLD BONE NO MORE WOO WOO{BARKING}:One must rather appreciate he or she
have rather than trying to have more when you know you can’t.
2. DONT SCRATCH WHILE YOU ARE STILL BEEN BARBERED: One should not be
interrupted when you are narrating a story.
3. WHEN A BAT SAYS IT WILL DEFAECATE ONTO GOD IT ENDs UP DEFAECATING ON ITSELF:
When one always intends to do or say something he should not forget it could
end you.
4. WHEN A CHILD DEFAECATE ON YOU WILL YOU CUT THAT PARTICULAR PART OF YOUR BODY
AWAY?: We should learn to forgive and consider no matter how you are provoked
especially with relatives and children.
5. IF YOUR CHILD DROWNED DOES NOT MEAN YOU WONT DRINK WATER ANYMORE: We must
learn to move on with life no matter what the challenge.
6. DON’T TAKE THE STEW WHEN I AM STILL PREPARING THE SLICES: Don’t interrupt me
when I am still telling you a story.
7. DON’T SAY WE HAVE BUT I HAVE: One should know to search for himself and not
to rely on what the entire family have.
8. WHEN A SHEIKH IS GETTING DROWN THEN YOU ARE ASKING OF HIS HAT: One should
make a suggestion before and not after an event.
9. IF WISHES WERE HORSES THE POOR WILL BEG AND RIDE:
10. IF YOU HAVE NEVER BEEN ONTO SOMEONES FARM YOU WILL THINK YOU ARE THE ONLY
FARMER: One should not think he is only one capable of doing certain things for
there are others elsewhere who are more capable than he is.
11. A DOG THAT HAS TWO HOMES WILL GO HUNGRY
12. A BILLY GOAT WILL FIND ITS WAY HOME ON THE DAY IT LIMPS:A person will know
his way to the house when he has a problem.
13.THE MOUTH OF THE ELDERLY SMELLS BUT ITS NOT ROTTEN:One need listen to the
adult for what they say might not make sense but will make sense in the future.
14. THE ONE WHO HAS EVER BEEN BITTEN BY A SNAKE IS ALWAYS SCARED WHENEVER HE
SEES AN EARTH WORM: One will always be scared and more careful  when he seem to
be going through a similar problem.
15.DO NOT PUT ON A CAP ON YOUR KNEECAP WHEN THERE IS THE HEAD: One should not
lie when there is the truth to be told.
16.WHEN THERE IS THE MOUTH DONT USE YOUR HEAD TO TALK:Go straight to the point
and going round in circle.
17.WHEN A CRAB SHOULD GRAP WHAT IT SHOULD NOT IT WILL END UP BREAKING ITS
CLAWS:When a person does or says what he should not,he finally gets in trouble.
person who sells eggs should not start a fight in the market.
No matter how far an eagle flies up the sky ,it will definitely come down to
look for food
Respect the fools to avoid noise
The little opportunity given to a monkey to wear cloths does not guarantee it
to join the dinning table.
You cannot convince a monkey that honey is sweeter than banana
No Matter How Hot Your Anger May Be, It Cannot Cook
Without fools there would be no wisdom.
however much the buttocks are in a hurry, they will always remain behind
Before You go out with a widow, you must first ask her what killed the
husband.
'A child can play with its mother's breasts, but not its father's testicles'
There's no virgin in a maternity ward...
It's better to fall from a tree and a break your back than to fall in love and
break your heart.
If A Man Wants To Grow A Long Tooth, He Should Have The Lip To Cover it.
An agama lizard in the village will always remain an agama in town
"When the mouse laughs at the cat, there is a hole nearby"
‘It requires a lot of carefulness to kill the fly that perches on the scrotum’
Man wey carry Ogbono soup pot for hand,and di man wey carry fufu for head,na
who go find who go?
Na co-operation dey mak rice full for pot.
Person wey madman don bite before if im see mechanic he go take off
Ear wey no dey hear word, go follow head fall for ground when dem cut am
Na person wey poo and im no clean yash fly dey follow pass
Na when rain stop naim person wey carry umbrella dey know say na load hin
carry.
Never underestimate the power of stupid people in large numbers.
Don’t mistake a short man for a boy
Anger, no matter how hot it is, can never cook yam.
A goat’s frown cannot stop it from being taken to the market.
A monkey that eats grass instead of banana is a goat.
No matter how far you urinate, the last
drop always falls at your feet’’
The gentle strides of a tiger does not indicate cowardice.
- The monkey who tries to see the hunter clearly collects bullets in its
eyes.
- The sparrow said that since the hunter has learnt how to shoot without
missing, it has equally learnt to fly without perching.
- Snails don't venture where horned animals gather.
- The frowning of a he-goat does not stop it from being priced.The lizard who threw confusion into his mother's funeral rite, did he expect outsiders to carry the burden of honouring his dead
- If the sun claims superiority over the moon, let it shine at night.
- A hen does not expect warning to hide it's chicks from the kite.
- A man does not test the depth of a river with both legs.
- A fly perched on the scrotum is gently nudged off...never
struck!
- A wise fish should know that a beautiful earthworm that
looks so easy to swallow, has a sharp hook attached to it.
- The okro plant never grows taller than the owner.
- The man who fetches firewood infested with insects invites lizards into his house.
- Rat wey follow lizard go swim no sabi say him go remain wet when lizard body don dry finish.
- Since all lizards lie on their bellies, one hardly tell which has stomach ache.
A child who asks questions does not become a fool. ~Ghanaian proverb
A child does not laugh at the ugliness of his mother. ~Ghanaian proverb
A straight tree never lasts in the forest. ~Ghanaian proverb
A crab does not beget a bird. ~Ghanaian proverb
A cracked bell can never sound well. ~Ghanaian proverbThe lizard who threw confusion into his mother's funeral rite, did he expect outsiders to carry the burden of honouring his dead
A healthy person who begs for food is an insult to a generous farmer. ~Ghanaian proverb
A woman is a flower in a garden; her husband is the fence around it. ~Ghanaian proverb
He who seems to be for you may be working against you. ~Ghanaian proverb
Fire and gunpowder do not sleep together. ~Ghanaian proverb
Let not what you cannot do tear you from what you can do. ~Ghanaian proverb
Hunger is felt by a slave and hunger is felt by a king. ~Ghanaian proverb
If things are getting easier, maybe you’re headed downhill. ~Ghanaian proverb
If an opportunity is not taken when it comes, it passes away. ~Ghanaian proverb
If the strong man has nothing else, he can at least command others. ~Ghanaian proverb
The length of a frog can only be determined after it dies. ~Ghanaian proverb
Do good because of tomorrow. ~Ghanaian proverb
You must act as if it is impossible to fail. ~Ghanaian proverb
So many little things makes a man love a woman in a big way. ~Ghanaian proverb
Do not follow the path. Go where there is no path to begin a trail. ~Ghanaian proverb
If a blind man says he will throw a stone at you, he probably has his foot on one. ~Ghanaian proverb
Got a stone but didn’t get a nut to crack, got a nut but didn’t get a stone to crack it with. ~Ghanaian proverb
It is the calm and silent water that drowns a man. ~Ghanaian proverb
It is easy to become a monk in one’s old age. ~Ghanaian proverb
No one tests the depth of the river with both feet. ~Ghanaian proverb
Where error gets to, correction cannot reach. ~Ghanaian proverb
Be glad you are unknown, for when you are known, you would wish you weren’t. ~Ghanaian proverb
If you are on the road to nowhere, find another road. ~Ghanaian proverb
One falsehood spoils a thousand truths. ~Ghanaian proverb
When you are sitting in your own house, you don’t learn anything. You must get out of your house to learn. ~Ghanaian proverb
It is a child who has never traveled who says that only his mother prepares tasty meals. ~Ghanaian proverb
The ruin of a nation begins in the homes of its people. ~Ghanaian proverb
A knife does not know who is its master. ~Ghanaian proverb
A slave does not choose his master. ~Ghanaian proverb
A woman is like a blanket: If you cover yourself with it, it bothers you; if you throw it aside you will feel the cold. ~Ghanaian proverb
By going and coming, a bird weaves its nest. ~Ghanaian proverb
He who is guilty has much to say. ~Ghanaian proverb
If a woman gets rich she changes into a man. ~Ghanaian proverb
If the hunter comes back with mushrooms, don’t ask him how his hunt was. ~Ghanaian proverb
If we knew where death resided, we would never stay there. ~Ghanaian proverb
If you are in hiding, don’t light a fire. ~Ghanaian proverb
It is no shame at all to work for money. ~Ghanaian proverb
It is the wife who knows her husband. ~Ghanaian proverb
Marriage is like a groundnut: you have to crack them to see what is inside. ~Ghanaian proverb
No one boasts of what belongs to another. ~Ghanaian proverb
The chicken also knows when it’s morning, but still watches the mouth of the cock. ~Ghanaian proverb
What is bad luck for one man is good luck for another. ~Ghanaian proverb
If you’ve not been on someone else’s farm, you cannot say that you’re the only true farmer. ~Ghanaian proverb
Nobody can prepare for the harmattan by drinking plenty of water. ~Ghanaian proverb [Harmattan is the season of the dry wind that comes from the desert]
It is the human being that counts. I call gold; it does not answer. I call cloth; it does not answer. It is the human being that counts. ~Ghanaian proverb
A single tree can not make a forest. ~Nigerian proverb
When a ripe fruit sees an honest man, it drops. ~Nigerian proverb
Even when fire has done its very worst, one still has to resort to it. ~Nigerian proverb
A man who has one finger pointing at another has three pointing towards himself. ~Nigerian proverb
A fowl does not forget where it lays it eggs. ~Nigerian proverb
It is by the strength of their number that the ants in the field are able to carry their prey to the nest. ~Nigerian proverb
When an only kolanut is presented with love, it carries with it more value than might otherwise be associated with a whole pod of several kolanuts. ~Nigerian proverb
By being grateful, a man makes himself deserving of yet another kindness. ~Nigerian proverb
A speedy wrestling and a bad fall go hand in hand. ~Nigerian proverb
One finger cannot remove lice from the head. ~Nigerian proverb
He who is courteous is not a fool. ~Nigerian proverb
Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense. ~Nigerian proverb
A hunter who has only one arrow does not shoot with careless aim. ~Nigerian proverb
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest. ~Nigerian proverb
Without retaliation evils would one day become extinct from the world. ~Nigerian proverb
One cannot go back to the farmer from whom one borrowed seed-yams to plant to say that the beetles have eaten up the seed-yams. ~Nigerian proverb
The one-eyed man does not thank God until he sees a blind man. ~Nigerian proverb
Two footsteps do not make a path. ~Nigerian proverb
Familiarity breeds contempt; distance breeds respect. ~Nigerian proverb
Without knowing a way thoroughly at day time, never attempt to pass it at night. ~Nigerian proverb
A farmer who would not work inside the rain and would not work under the sun, would have nothing to harvest at the end of the farming year. ~Nigerian proverb
Fishing without a net is just bathing. ~Nigerian proverb
It is only the tortoise that moves and carries its shell about, which it calls its house. ~Nigerian proverb
He who waits for a chance may wait for a long time. ~Nigerian proverb
Hold a true friend with both hands. ~Nigerian proverb
Horns do not grow before the head. ~Nigerian proverb
However far the stream flows, it never forgets its source. ~Nigerian proverb
However hard a thing is thrown into the air, it always falls to the ground. ~Nigerian proverb
If all seeds that fall were to grow, then no one could follow the path under the trees. ~Nigerian proverb
The bird that remembers its flockmates, never missed the way. ~Nigerian proverb
The habit of thinking is the habit of gaining strength. ~Nigerian proverb
If you can’t dance well, you’d better not get up. ~Nigerian proverb
What an old man will see while seating, a small child cannot see it even standing on top of mountain! ~Nigerian proverb
Before firing, you must take aim. ~Nigerian proverb
A bird does not change its feathers because the weather is bad. ~Nigerian proverb
Choose your fellow traveller before you start on your journey. ~Nigerian proverb
A smiling face dispels unhappiness. ~Nigerian proverb
He who marries a beauty marries trouble. ~Nigerian proverb
As long as you stay in a group, the lion will stay hungry. ~Nigerian proverb
A snake will always give birth to something long. ~Nigerian proverb
When the bush is on fire, the antelope ceases to fear the hunter’s bullet. ~Nigerian proverb
Two raindrops do not make a pool. ~Nigerian proverb
All is never said. ~Nigerian proverb
He who is sick will not refuse medicine. ~Nigerian proverb
He who does not lose his way by night will not lose his way by day. ~Nigerian proverb
A person once bitten by a snake will be scared by an old rope. ~Nigerian proverb
The child that will not allow his parents to sleep through the night must be prepared to stay awake himself. ~Nigerian proverb
When the elephants fight it is the grass that suffers. ~Nigerian proverb
A bird that flies from the ground onto an anthill does not know that it is still on the ground. ~Nigerian proverb
The heap of yams you will reap depends upon the number of mounds you have plowed. ~Nigerian proverb
If a toad jumps around in the daytime, it is either chasing something or something is chasing it. ~Nigerian proverb
A tree is best measured when it’s down. ~Nigerian proverb
Fine words do not produce food. ~Nigerian proverb
If one finger brought oil it soiled others. ~Nigerian proverb
An oil lamp feels proud to give light even though it wears itself away. ~Nigerian proverb
It is the first step that is difficult. ~Nigerian proverb
Does a man not know when he has pepper in his eyes? If we forget yesterday, how shall we remember tomorrow. ~Nigerian proverb
It takes a village to raise a child. ~Nigerian proverb
Not to know is bad; not to wish to know is worse. ~Nigerian proverb
The death that will kill a man begins as an appetite. ~Nigerian proverb
The disobedient fowl obeys in a pot of soup. ~Nigerian proverb
The frog does not jump in the daytime without reason. ~Nigerian proverb
The one being carried does not realize how far away the town is. ~Nigerian proverb
When the next house is on fire, ’tis high time to look to your own. ~Nigerian proverb
An ant-hill that is destined to become a giant ant-hill will definitely become one, no matter how many times it is destroyed by elephants. ~Nigerian proverb
He who is afraid of doing too much always does too little. ~Nigerian proverb
Sleep and indolence are not cousins of a good harvest. ~Nigerian proverb
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind. ~Nigerian proverb
It is not only the fox, even the snail arrives at its destination. ~Nigerian proverb
It is the same moon that wanes today that will be the full moon tomorrow. ~Nigerian proverb
The bottom of wealth is sometimes a dirty thing to behold. ~Nigerian proverb
The spider that knows what it will gain sits waiting patiently in its web. The praying mantis is never tired waiting all day. ~Nigerian proverb
A single man can not build a house. ~Nigerian proverb
A person on whose head lice are being removed, must be grateful. ~Nigerian proverb
When the laborer is praised, his cutlass begins to cut more keenly. ~Nigerian proverb
Money does not announce how it is earned but whereas properly earned money appreciates, improperly earned money depreciates. ~Nigerian proverb
We are what our thinking makes us. ~Nigerian proverb
The man who remembers others, remembers also his creator. ~Nigerian proverb
A person who picks something and decides to make it his own, ought to think how he would feel if he was the person who lost the property he picked. ~Nigerian proverb
Our examples are like seeds on a windy day, they spread far and wide. ~Nigerian proverb
It is the fear of what tomorrow may bring that makes the tortoise to carry his house along with him wherever he goes. ~Nigerian proverb
He who does not look ahead always remains behind. ~Nigerian proverb
The tree that cannot shed its old leaves in the dry season, cannot survive the period of drought. ~Nigerian proverb
“It is praise worthy to be brave and fearless, but sometimes it is better to be a coward. We often stand in the compound of a coward to point at the ruins where a brave man used to live.’’
·        “Wisdom is like a goat skin bag; every man carries his own”.
·        “If the lizard of the homestead should neglect to do the things for which its kind is known, it will be mistaken for the lizard of the farmland.”
·        “A boy sent by his father to steal does not go stealthily but breaks the door with his feet.”
·        “When an old woman hears the dance she knows her old age deserts her.”
·         “It is only when you are close to a man that you can begin to smell his breath.”
·        “If a blind man does not know his own stick, tell me what else would  he know.”
·        “If you fail to take away a strong man’s sword when he is on the ground, will you do it when he gets up?”
·        “When a mad man walks naked, it is his kinsmen who feel shame, not himself.”
·        “A goat does not eat into a hen’s stomach no matter how friendly the two maybe”
·        “A man of worth never gets up to unsay what he said yesterday”
·        “The inquisitive eye will only blind it own sight”
·        “A man who does not lick his lips, can he blame the harmattan for drying them?”
·        “If we fall back, can we complain that others are rushing forward?”
·        “When suffering knocks on your door and you say there is no seat for him, he tell you not to worry because he has brought his own stool”
·        “What a man does not know is greater than he”
·        “Only a foolish man can go after a leopard with his bare hand”
·        “In dealing with a man who thinks you are a fool, it is good sometimes to remind him that you know what he knows but have chosen to appear foolish for the sake of peace”
·        “When we hear a house has fallen do we ask if the ceiling fell with it”
·        “The death that will kill a man begins as an appetite”
·        “If a man sought for a companion who acted entirely like himself, he would live in solitude”
·        “The greatest lair among men still speak the truth to his own son”
·        “A boy who tries to wrestle with his father gets blinded by the old man’s lion cloth”
·        “When brothers fight to death a stranger inherit their father’s estate”
·        “The man that brings anti-infested faggot into his hut should not grumble when lizard begin to pay him a visit”
·        “A disease that has never been seen before cannot be cured with every- day herbs”
·        “No matter how many spirits plot a man’s death, it come to nothing unless his chi (personal god), has a hand in the deliberation”
·        “A man who means to buy palm wine does not hang about at home until all the palm wine in the market is sold”
·        “The language of young men is pull down and destroy; but an old man speaks of conciliation”
·        “It is the fear of offence that makes men swallow poison”
·        “A man of sense does not go hunting little bush rodents when his age mates are after big game”
·        “No man however great is greater than his people”
·        “Every lizard lies on its belly, so we cannot tell which has a belly-ache”
* ‘‘Until the lions have their own historians, the history of the hunt will always glorify the hunter”.
* ”You cannot plant greatness as you plant yams or maize. Who ever planted an Iroko tree- the greatest in the forest? You may collect all the Iroko seeds in the world, open the soil and put them there. It will be in vain. The great tree chooses where to grow and we find it there….. so it is with greatness in men”.
* ” we cannot trample upon the humanity of others without devaluing our own. The Igbo, always practically put it concretely in their proverb Onye ji onye n’ ani ji onwe ya. ” He who will hold another down in the mud must stay in the mud to keep him down”
* ” If you want to eat a toad you look for a fat and juicy one”.
* ” An only palm fruit does not get lost in the fire”.
* ” A man who lives on the banks of the Niger(River) should not wash his hands in spittle”.
* ” When a new saying gets to the land of empty men, they lose their head over it”.
* ” The eye is not harmed by sleep”.
* ” We do not want to be like the unfortunate child who grows his first tooth and grow a damaged one”.
* ” Shall we kill a snake and carry it in our hand when we have a bag for putting things in”.
* ” If a man return from a long journey and no one says nno (welcome) to him, he feels like one who has not arrived”.
* ”A dept may get moldy but it never rots”.
* ” The most horrible sight in the world cannot put out the eye”.
* ” The sun will shine on those who stand, before it shines on those who kneel under them”.
* ” If a child washed his hands, he could eat with kings”.
* ” When the moon is shinning, the cripple becomes hungry for a walk”.
* ” An old woman is always uneasy when dry bone are mentioned in a proverb”.
* ” The lizard that jumped from a high Iroko tree to the ground said he would praise himself if no one else did”.
* ” Eneke the bird says that since men have learnt to shoot without missing he has learnt to fly without perching”.
* “Those Whose palm kernels were cracked for them by a benevolent spirits should not forget to be humble”.
* ” When a person say yes, his Chi (Personal god) says yes also”.
* ” A man that makes trouble for others also makes trouble for himself”.
* ” If one finger brings oil, it soil all the others”.
* ” When a man blasphemes what do we do? Do we go and stop his mouth? No. We put our fingers into our ears to stop us hearing”.
* ” As a man danced so the drums were beaten for him”.
* ” When a hand shake goes below the elbow, then know that it has turned into something else”.
He who will hold another down in the mud must stay in the mud to keep him down.
“When the moon is shining the cripple becomes hungry for a walk”
The lizard who threw confusion into his mother's funeral rite, did he expect outsiders to carry the burden of honouring his dead
"The man who carries a deity is not a king."
Proverbs are the palm oil with which words are eaten.
If a man kills the sacred python in the secrecy of his hut, the matter lies between him and his God
A man who brings home ant-infested faggots should not complain if he is visited by lizards
A child who asks questions does not become a fool.
Knowledge is like a baobab tree; no one can encompass it with their hands.
Let not what you cannot do tear you from what you can do.
You must act as if it is impossible to fail.
The ruin of a nation begins in the homes of its people.
Two men in a burning house must not stop to argue.
Do not follow the path. Go where there is no path to begin a trail.
If you are on the road to nowhere, find another road.
When you are sitting in your own house, you don’t learn anything. You must get out of your house to learn.
It is a child who has never traveled who says that only his mother prepares tasty meals.
If you’ve not been on someone else’s farm, you cannot say that you’re the only true farmer.
Nobody can prepare for the harmattan* by drinking plenty of water.
It is the human being that counts. I call gold; it does not answer. I call cloth; it does not answer. It is the human being that counts.
A woman is a flower in a garden; her husband is the fence around it. -- Ghana Proverb
It is not wrong to go back for that which you have forgotten. -- Ghana Proverb
It is easy to become a monk in one's old age. -- Ghanaian Proverb
There is no medicine to cure hatred. -- Ghanaian Proverb
A good woman should be as bright as sunshine, as black as ink, and as sweet as honey. -- Ghanaian Proverb
Since the beggar would come any way, it's best to invite him first. -- Ghanaian Proverb
When a deceiving man tells you to climb a tree, tell him to climb it first. If he finds a comfortable spot you can follow him. -- Ghana Proverb

Look to the past to help us move forward in the future. -- Ghanaian Proverb
It is Mr. Old-Man-Monkey who marries Mrs. Old-Woman-Monkey. -- Ghanaian Proverb
One knows even when one neighbor's bread is in the oven. -- Ghana Proverb
A Fanti man builds his mansion in his stomach. -- Ghanaian Proverb
Even the elephant can fan off flies with its short tail. -- Ghana Proverb
A powerful deity is the one to whom sacrifices are offered. -- Ghana Proverb
A healthy person who begs for food is an insult to a generous farmer. -- Ghanaian Proverb
Not to know is bad; not to wish to know is worse. -- Nigerian Proverb
A child who is carried on the back will not know how far the journey is. -- Nigerian Proverb
Mother's soup is always the best in the world. -- Nigerian Proverb
If you wait for tomorrow, tomorrow comes. If you don't wait for tomorrow, tomorrow comes. -- Nigerian Proverb
It takes a whole village to raise a child. -- Nigerian Proverb
One goat cannot carry another goat's tail. -- Nigerian Proverb
A fight between grasshoppers is a joy to the crow. -- Nigerian Proverb
When a palm-branch reaches its height, it gives way for a fresh one to grow. -- Nigerian Proverb
We live by hope, but a reed never becomes an Iroko tree by dreaming. -- Nigerian Proverb
The weak warrior wearing sandals overcomes the brave with a thorn in his foot. -- Nigerian Proverb
A. From the Akans
This ethnic group is located in the easter, central, and western parts of Ghana and is well-known for its wealth and rich culture. There is much literature on the Akans of Ghana that can be accessed from several Web sites, including this one.
1. Rain beats the leopard’s skin but it does not wash out the spots.
[Interpretation: Old habits die hard. If you are known in your community for one thing (especially, that which is bad), it will be very difficult for the society to change its opinion about you even if you one day do good things. Impressions count a lot.]
2. Wood already touched by fire is not hard to set alight.
3. It is the wife who knows her husband.
4. Only when you have crossed the river can you say the crocodile has a lump on his snout.
5. If you are in hiding, don’t light a fire.
6. One falsehood spoils a thousand truths.
7. When a man is wealthy, he may wear an old cloth.
8. Do not call the forest that shelters you a jungle.
9. Hunger knows no bounds. It is felt by both a slave and a king.
10. The moon moves slowly but it crosses the town.
12. The ruin of a nation begins in the homes of its people.
13. When the cock is drunk, he forgets about the hawk.
[Interpretation: This proverb is an admonition to people who get out of one circumstance and forget about it. In life, it is always good for one to remember that whatever threatens one’s life never goes away, regardless of one’s circumstances. The advice is that one should always be on the alert.]
14. There is no medicine to cure hatred.
15. It is a bad child who does not take advice.
16. When a man is coming toward you, you need not say: “Come here.”
17. Even though the old man is strong and hearty, he will not live forever.
18. When a king has good counselors, his reign is peaceful.
19. By the time the fool has learned the game, the players have dispersed.
20. The poor man and the rich man do not play together.
21. It is the calm and silent water that drowns a man.
22. When you follow in the path of your father, you learn to walk like him.
23. When a woman is hungry, she says: “Roast something for the children that they may eat.”
24. What is bad luck for one man is good luck for another.
25. When the fool is told a proverb, its meaning has to be explained to him.
26. He who cannot dance will say: “The drum is bad.”
27. One cannot both feast and become rich.
28. It is no shame at all to work for money.
1. Na for old age ashawo dey know
the value of pikin.
2. Woman wey never see problem...
Na im dey still hold breast run.
3. Woman wey dey find pikin no dey
wear pant sleep.
4. Rat wey follow lizard enter rain, Na
later é go hear am.
5. Na for afternoon dem dey find
black goat.
6. Weather hot!! É No mean say fowl
go lay boiled egg.
7. EYE WEY DEY CRY DEY SEE ROAD.
8. Pikin wey him mama back cross
water, wey say him march fish, wetin
him mama go march?
9. Small pikin wey dem carry for
back no know say the journey far.
10. Person wey don faint before no
be stranger to death.
11. Person wey chop belle full, no
know wetin hungry man dey see.
12. No be as woman dey close eye
enjoy sex she dey enjoy labour
pains.
13. Yansh no get teeth but e dey cut
poo.
14. Lizard wey fall from tall iroko
tree, if nobody hail am!! é go hail
himself
15. Toto water small, but é reach
prick take baff.
16. IF GIRL TAKE HUSBAND DO
BOYFRIEND, SHE GO TAKE
BOYFRIEND DO HUSBAND.
17. Cockroach wey jam fowl, jam bad
luck.
18. Na cricket tell him children say,
No matter how ground strong, Them
no go sleep outside.
19. Pikin wey say him mama no fine
they use style call him papa blind
man.
20. No be eye wey dem take chop
eba dem take dey share meat.
21. Person wey use Elephant set
trap, na him know wetin he wan
Catch.
22. When Breeze Blow Fowl Yash Go
Open.
23. STUDENT WEY READ NA HIM
SERIOUS, BUT STUDENT WEY PASS
NA HIM KNOW BOOK.
24. Dem no dey tell tortoise say race
don start.
25. Dem no dey tell blind man say
salt no dey for food.
26. Before you see monkey, monkey
don see you.
27. Thief wey jump fence enter house
where owner dey wait for am, no go
jump again.
28. If pikin say he sabi die, him papa
sef go tell am say him sabi bury.
29. Na wetin dey sweet for goat
mouth, Na im dey kill am.
30. If e be like say everybody dey
craze" na you dey craze.
31. Meat wey you dey forbid, no use
your teeth cut am.
32. My thing and our thing no be the
same oh
33. Na happiness dey make prick
stand.
34. Na as goat stand for market dem
dey price am.
35. Craze no hard to form, na the
trekking be wahala.
36. Its a small world!! No mean say
you fit trek from Naija go London.
37. No matter how hot your temper
be, e no fit boil beans.
38. Chicken wey run from Borno go
Ibadan go still end up inside pot of
soup.
39. Today’s newspaper na tomorrow
Suya wrap.
40. Akara and moin moin get the
same parent, na wetin dem pass
through make dem different.
29. Money is sharper than a sword.
30. It is the fool’s sheep that break loose twice.
31. When you are rich, you are hated; when you are poor, you are despised.
32. It is Mr. Old-Man-Monkey who marries Mrs. Old-Woman-Monkey.
33. Fire and gunpowder do not sleep together.
34. Even though we carry gunpowder on our head, we still smoke a pipe.
35. No one tests the depth of a river with both feet.
36. Two small antelopes can beat a big one.
37. When the bag tears, the shoulders get a rest.
38. If you want someone more knowledgeable than yourself to identify a bird you do not first remove the feathers.
39. No one points out God to a child.A man who is trampled to death by an elephant is a man who is blind and deaf.
He who is courteous is not a fool.
The fowl perspires, but the feathers do not allow us to see the perspiration.
GREED
Those who are carrying elephants home on their heads, need not use their toes to dig up crickets on the way.
One can only try to get what one can from the head of an elephant, no one ever carries it home.
The alcohol that is insufficient for a whole town ought not to intoxicate one man.
The leech that does not let go even when it is filled, dies on the dry land.
A bag that says it will not take more, and a traditional doctor who says he would not leave anything behind are both sure to suffer.
GOOD BEHAVIOR
If a man is not clean and smooth, there is nothing he can really do about pride.
Even an old woman may run when a goat carries her snuff-box.
When a ripe fruit sees an honest man, it drops.
It is one person in a street that kills a dog and the street is named a street of dog killers.
When a fowl gets to a new town, it stands on one leg until it knows that it is a town where people stand on their two legs.
When a face is sullen it remains there to be seen on its owner.
When a woman cannot have good palm-nuts to give her rich oil, she still has to maintain decency in order to remain one of those that sell good quality oil.
A man who has one finger pointing at another has three pointing towards himself.
A man who eases himself in public, gives cause to others to despise him.
The man who is honored, has first honored himself.
Greatness and beauty do not belong to the gods alone.
Anyone who urinates in a stream should be warned because any of his relatives may drink from the water.
A person who does not bathe, must know it of himself that he is dirty.
Antagonism is not good for fowls, and it is not good for goats; worse still, it is not good for human beings.
Our examples are like seeds on a windy day, they spread far and wide.
A clay pot of water is never hot-tempered.
A person who picks something and decides to make it his own, ought to think how he would feel if he was the person who lost the property he picked.
He who is called a man must behave like a man.
If one would not eat pounded yam for its own sake, one can still eat it for the sake of the soup that goes with it.
One must have to wait till the evening of one’s life time to know what gratitude to pay to one’s guardian spirit.
CONSEQUENCES
A man who is advised and he takes it, is still a man who acts from his own free will.
If hunger forces a farmer in a particular year to eat both his yam tubers and the seed-yams, the succeeding years would still be worse because he would have no yams to eat and none to plant.
Sometimes the rain might force a man more than once to seek shelter under the same tree.
When the roots of a tree begin to decay, it spreads death to the branches.
It is the fear of what tomorrow may bring that makes the tortoise to carry his house along with him wherever he goes.
PEACE
Let’s fight, let’s fight, no one knows whom fighting would favor.
Two men quarreling do not share the same seat on a canoe.
To have no enemies is equivalent to wealth.
If the owner of two adjacent farms cannot be friends, then they must wait till their next reincarnation to be able to make friends.
Whoever says “let’s fight” does not know who will be victorious.
When a man finds that he was wrong to have refused to eat, he should leave his anger and play a harp to call for harmony.
Without retaliation evils would one day become extinct from the world.
A spacious ground is the right place to demonstrate one’s skill in wrestling.
WISDOM AND AGE
An old banana leaf was once young and green.
Old age does not come in just one day.
COURAGE
He who does not look ahead always remains behind.
Courage is the father of success.
Charms do not perform miracles on the shelf; they perform for those who are brave.
FAMILY
A family name is not cooked and eaten, one’s life is the thing.
A person who has children does not die.
We can not choose who our relatives should be, even though we may come to like some better than others.
A woman who is not successful in her own marriage has no advice to give to her younger generations.
When a man loses his prestige, he does not regain it by going to where he is not known.
A good name is better than gold.
A man that begets a barren cannot have a grand child.
A piece of iron can only become what the blacksmith says it should become.
A child who fears beating, would never admit that he played with a missing knife.
A child’s face is his mirror.
It is the habit that a child forms at home, that follows them to their marriage.
It is an irresponsible adult that creates enmity because of a disagreement that arises between two children.
A child is what you put into him.
“Flog my erring child” comes from the lips, “don’t hurt him/her” comes from the bottom of the heart.
Talks that are considered to be important must be made to drag on for so long as to make even the deaf begin to hear it.
Love is better than a whip.
A child who has no mother will not have scars to show on his back.
Even as the archer loves the arrow that flies, so too he loves the bow that remains constant in his hands.
FRIENDS
To eat from the same pot with another man, is to take an oath of perpetual friendship with him.
SURVIVAL
It is the toothless animal that arrives first at the base of the fruit tree, to eat his fill before others arrive.
A child does not die because the mother’s breasts are dry.
If the load is too heavy for someone to carry, one would be better off to give the load to the ground to carry.
The tree that cannot shed its old leaves in the dry season, cannot survive the period of drought.
PATRIOTISM
When one is taking a chicken from its roost, the hen is bound to attack with at least its claws.
Even when fire has done its very worst, one still has to resort to it.
When a soup is unpalatable, and the paste of the pounded yam that goes with it is not smooth, that is the time to know a man who loves to eat pounded yam.
A pad that breaks a pot of water does not remain on the head.
A bush fowls’ playground is never appreciably spacious.
It is the boast of every juju priest that unless he dies, no thief can ever come to steal his juju away.
What affects the nose must also affect the eyes that must weep for it.
If a greedy eater is near a patient, such a patient can never survive.
There is no elephant that complains about the weight of its trunk. No elephant is burdened by the weight of its tusks.
When the elderly ones in a house travel, the younger ones quickly grow in experience.
It is when there is a stampede, that a person with big buttocks knows that he carries a load.
If a soup is sweet, it is money that cooks it.
If a child is not well-behaved, she is not sent by the mother to go alone to the market to buy things for her.
A glorious past is the work of a glorious man.
MISC
The goat that cries the loudest is not the one that will eat the most.
It is the self-love of the king parrot that made him become a talkative.
The owl is the wisest of all birds because the more it sees, the less it talks.
If gold rusts, what will iron do?
A masquerade does not perform to an outside audience until he performs well at the home base.
How can man be remembered when the giant trees in the forest are soon forgotten.
Dead though the oil-palm may be, the maggot in it lives on.
When a fire starts from the shrine, no precaution can be possible.
Beetles that roll balls out of human faeces demand to be hidden away from the rich man, because there is nothing he wouldn’t buy.
Our elders quote the cock as saying that “it would not be good if one becomes the only person in the world, and that is why they crow every morning to show their number”.
A strong man is remembered on the day of the fight, and a gluttony on the day pounded yam is surplus.
Beauty is not sold and eaten.
A masquerade is not a spirit only because of its mask.
When a woman prepares a dish which others find unpalatable, she says that she prepared it to suit her own taste.
At a time a cockerel matures, it begins to crow to tell the world the time of day.
They are the gods themselves that white-wash the fruits of the pumpkins.
However much the world degenerates, man shall never find worms in salt.
A diviner cannot accurately divine his own future.
A lizard that fell from the top of a tree wastes its time looking back to where it fell from; if there was anything good the lizard deserved, it could not have missed it while it was there on top of the tree.
It is what the eyes of one man sees that is described as a boa constrictor.
Once a cock begins to crow, it never again becomes dumb.
He whose throat is longer than his arm must pray constantly for gods’ protection.
It is he who has no place to call at that moves fast through life.
No frog is tied by a rope to a pond.
The fly that has no one to advise it follows the corpse into the grave.
Everybody joins to blame or condemn a child who overthrows the pot of soup.
Money has the capability of making people laugh; but when they laugh, the foolish ones sometimes forget to close their mouths.
No one feels the pains that arise from unintended injury.
The glow-works light the nights, but more so the night that their mother prepares porridge.
When it is the turn of a man to become the head of a village, he does not need to diviner to tell him that he is destined to rule.
It is for saying that he has no time that the monkey’s body became over-grown with long hairs.
Our elders say that at sunset, it is one’s cloth that one goes to remove from the village square.
The spirit that keeps one going when one has no choice of what else to do must not be mistaken for valor.
It is the fortunate person that the physician undertakes to help.
The gods may still send a gentle breeze when they want to bless us.
Any wealth that takes only a market week to acquire is sure to contain in it things for which the gods will surely come to make claims.
A crowd is like a smoldering log which can spark into a flame at any time.
It is usual of a person found guilty in a trial to boast that he would press his case further.
40. A family is like a forest, when you are outside it is dense, when you are inside you see that each tree has its own position to occupy.
41. If all seeds that fall were to grow, then no one could follow the path under the trees.
42. Although the snake does not fly it catches the bird whose home is in the sky.
43. Whatever is destined to succeed knows no failure.
B. From the Ewes
Members of this ethnic group are in Ghana, Togo, and Benin. Noted for their cultural diversity, the Ewes constitute a significant proportion of Ghana’s population. This link provides more information on the Ewe people.
1. What the cat sees and turns its eyes away from, the dog sees and barks at.
2. If there were no elephant in the jungle, the buffalo would be a great animal.
3. Even though the eye is blind, it still contains sleep.
4. The stomach has no holiday.
5. The monkey says that yawning is contagious.
6. A child who knows how to wash his hands dines with the elders.
7. In the presence of the head, the knee does not wear a hat.
[Interpretation: If you invest all your resources in one venture, you stand the risk of losing all and suffering the painful consequences. Before you do anything at all, make sure that you have a back-up for it. In other words, it is dangerous for you to plunge yourself into a situation without any careful effort to determine its outcome in advance.]
8. The antelope says that if you stay at one spot in the forest for far too long, you will become thirsty.
9. He who tests the depth of a stream with both feet must be prepared to swim.
10. The parrot that knows how precious its feathers are does not build its nest by the roadside.
11. A lizard that knows how to hide grows to become a crocodile.
[Interpretation: If you know how to handle issues properly, you will always make progress.]
12. If you store saliva in your mouth for too long, it turns into water.
13. A crab does not beget a bird.
14. Monkeys play by sizes.
15. A child must learn to cut only the morsel that is fit for his mouth.
16. When a bachelor goes to sleep, he does not hide his entire body in the mosquito net.
17. It is not everybody who is awake when the rain falls at night.
18. The child who has not traveled anywhere before believes that his mother is the best cook.
19. If you find no fish, you have to eat bread.
20. The wasp says that several regular trips to a mud pit enables it to build a house.
21. The wealth of the greedy ultimately goes to the community.
22. Loving someone who does not love you is like loving the rain that falls in the forest.
23. Only someone else can scratch your back for you.
24. The bitter heart eats its owner.
25. A man who pays respect to the great paves the way for his own greatness.
26. A proud heart can survive a general failure because such a failure does not prick its pride.
27. Do not look where you fell, but where you slipped.
28. If you look at a king’s mouth, you will never think that he ever sucked his mother’s breast.
29. Looking somewhere is better than not to look anywhere at all.
30. If you do not spare a day to fix a door to your room, you will waste three years searching for your money (in the room) but you will never find it.
31. If you want to speak to God, tell it to the wind.
32. In a community of beggars, stealing and not begging, is considered a crime.
33. Much roaming about deprived the male rat of its fat.
34. The cockerel drinking water raises its head to God in thankfulness.
35. A woman is a flower in a garden; her husband is the fence around it.
36. An African should not be made to suffer the loss of an arm from a gunshot in Europe.
37. Though the lion and the antelope happen to live in the same forest, the antelope still has time to grow up.
38. A stranger does not skin a sheep that is paid as a fine at a chief’s court.
39. The orphan does not rejoice after a heavy breakfast.
40. The poor man’s main tool is his tongue with which he defends himself.
41. “Though I am not edible,” says the vulture, “yet I nurse my eggs in the branches of a high tree because man is hard to be trusted.”
42. Yam is sweet, but one should eat it in the normal way, lest swallowing chokes him.
A man who is trampled to death by an elephant is a man who is blind and deaf.
A hunter who has only one arrow does not shoot with careless aim.
A mouse that removes the palm-nut that turns out to be the bait of a trap, would already have known that the palm-nut does not ripen on the ground.
When a palm-branch reaches its height, it gives way for a fresh one to grow.
A bottle of oil warmed over the fire has no means of producing oil by itself.
One cannot go back to the farmer from whom one borrowed seed-yams to plant to say that the beetles have eaten up the seed-yams.
If one were to remove every smoking wood from a fire and condemn it as bad, one would be killing the fire itself.
It is wisdom to prevent someone from whom one cannot accept repayment to have access to one’s valuable possessions.
It is the brutally outspoken man that earns enmity.
The elephant and the tiger do not go hunting on the same pasture.
A farmer does not boast that he has had a good harvest until his stock of yams lasts till the following harvest season.
He who pursues an innocent chicken always stumbles.
The fish that can see that its water is getting shallower, cannot be stranded.
Without knowing a way thoroughly at day time, never attempt to pass it at night.
It is only the tortoise that moves and carries its shell about, which it calls its house.
It is not enough to run, one must arrive and know when one has arrived.
It is a lazy man who says “it is only because I have no time that my farm is overgrown with weeds”.
A man who lives on the bank of a river does not use spittle to wash his hands.
We do not use our bare feet to search for hidden thorns which we have seen in day time.
The gods only hear one wish at a time, and nothing more.
When will the goat be strong enough to kill a leopard.
Every river knows where its water would not be soaked up into the earth, and that is where it flows past.
HARD WORK
A farmer does not conclude by the mere look of it that a corn is unripe; he tears it open for examination.
To do one’s duty is to eat the prized fruit of honor.
A farmer who would not work inside the rain and would not work under the sun, would have nothing to harvest at the end of the farming year.
The heap of yams you will reap depends upon the number of mounds you have plowed.
It is the work of one’s hands that decides what one eats for dinner – for some it is pounded yam, for others it is pounded plantain or nothing.
An ant-hill that is destined to become a giant ant-hill will definitely become one, no matter how many times it is destroyed by elephants.
He who is afraid of doing too much always does too little.
Sleep and indolence are not cousins of a good harvest.
Success is 10% ability, and 90% sweat.
We live by hope, but a reed never becomes an Iroko tree by dreaming.
Sinews and big muscles do not make a farmer.
NOT GIVING UP
One must row in whichever boat one finds one’s self.
When a person regrets endlessly, he gets to pay more for what he regrets.
It is not only the fox, even the snail arrives at its destination.
It is the same moon that wanes today that will be the full moon tomorrow.
It is only the toad that gets up from its knees and falls back again on its knees.
The spider that knows what it will gain sits waiting patiently in its web. The praying mantis is never tired waiting all day.
Who says the oasis in the desert is happy because of its hidden spring of water?
The cricket is never blinded by the sand of its burrowing.
An oil lamp feels proud to give light even though it wears itself away.
A bird does not change its feathers because the weather is bad.
COOPERATION
Common proverbs of cooperation are:
A herbalist that refuses to ask laymen what leaves he looks for in the bush, must have difficulties getting what he wants.
It is a pot of water that is already half full that the world would like to help in filling to the brim.
If a drum is not made, it is the fault of the master; but if the drum is made and is not beaten, then that is the fault of the boys.
When an elephant falls, meat is sure to be surplus for those who follow the hunter.
One finger cannot remove lice from the head.
When the teeth fall off, the nose is sure to collapse.
A man can not sit down alone to plan for prosperity.
A man who lives alone is either always overworked, or always overfed.
A single tree can not make a forest.
A single man can not build a house.
If a child shoots and arrow that reaches the top of a tall palm tree, then it must be that an elderly person carved the arrow for him.
A man who walks alone carries a load of palm-fronds.
When the right hand washes the left hand and the left hand washes the right hand, both hands become clean.
A housewife who complains that there is not enough foodstuff in the market should remember that if her husband adds to what is already available, there would be more for everyone.
It is by the strength of their number that the ants in the field are able to carry their prey to the nest.
Two footsteps do not make a path.
Two raindrops do not make a pool.
PATIENCE
A speedy wrestling and a bad fall go hand in hand.
Patient people are patient to gain longevity.
However long the moon disappears, someday it must shine again.
It is little by little that a bird builds its nest.
The thirsty fig sits waiting patiently, waiting for the arrival of the rains.
One does not become a master diviner in a day. A forest is not made in a season. The swoop of an eagle has seen many seasons and floods…
It is not only the hare, the tortoise arrives also at the destination.
KINDNESS
Without knowing a person we must not hate him.
He who digs a pit for others must invariably fall into it.
Those who derive fun watching lunatics, out to have one as a child or relation to know the pains of it.
A person on whose head lice are being removed, must be grateful.
By being grateful, a man makes himself deserving of yet another kindness.
When the laborer is praised, his cutlass begins to cut more keenly.
If men were now to turn their hostility towards the cat, it would not be long before the domestic cat becomes a wild animal.
If the owner of a calabash calls it a worthless calabash, others will join him to use it to pack rubbish.
Criticism is easy but it does not create.
If one imitates the upright, one becomes upright; if one imitates the crooked, one becomes crooked.
When a sickle is drawn, it in turn draws the tree to which it is hooked.
If a person who curses another is not better than the person he curses, a request is never made of him to rescind the curse.
HONESTY
Money does not announce how it is earned but whereas properly earned money appreciates, improperly earned money depreciates.
The bottom of wealth is sometimes a dirty thing to behold.
Rather than tell a lie to help a friend, it is better to assist him in paying the fine for his offense.
THOUGHTFULNESS
A fowl does not forget where it lays it eggs.
The habit of thinking is the habit of gaining strength.
It is one word of advice that one needs to give to a wise man, and that word keeps multiplying in his mind.
Does a man not know when he has pepper in his eyes? If we forget yesterday, how shall we remember tomorrow.
Thoughts and dreams are the foundation of our being.
We are what our thinking makes us.
GENEROSITY/SHARING
It is an unthinking man who achieves prosperity, and then finds with time, that his body can no longer pass through the door.
When an only kolanut is presented with love, it carries with it more value than might otherwise be associated with a whole pod of several kolanuts.
The man who remembers others, remembers also his creator.
The bird that remembers its flockmates, never missed the way.
When a dying man cries, it is not because of where he is going which he knows nothing about, but because of what he wishes he would have done in the world he is leaving behind.
The head could not have got to where it is now if it did not give.
Back to Categories
HUMILITY
A performing masquerade who tries too hard to outclass his colleagues may expose his anus.
It is from a small seed that the giant Iroko tree has its beginning.
A family name is not cooked and eaten, one’s li
